Update worker docs with recent enhancements (#7969)
matrix-org/synapse: docs/workers.md

## Main process/worker communication

The processes communicate with each other via a Synapse-specific protocol called
'replication' (analogous to MySQL- or Postgres-style database replication) which
feeds streams of newly written data between processes so they can be kept in
sync with the database state.

Additionally, processes may make HTTP requests to each other. Typically this is
used for operations which need to wait for a reply - such as sending an event.

As of Synapse v1.13.0, it is possible to configure Synapse to send replication
via a [Redis pub/sub channel](https://redis.io/topics/pubsub), and is now the
recommended way of configuring replication. This is an alternative to the old
direct TCP connections to the main process: rather than all the workers
connecting to the main process, all the workers and the main process connect to
Redis, which relays replication commands between processes. This can give a
significant cpu saving on the main process and will be a prerequisite for
upcoming performance improvements.

If using Redis the appropriate dependencies must be installed. If using a
virtual env these can be installed by:

```sh
pip install matrix-synapse[redis]

> ```

Reviewer: I realise it might be considered out of scope, but I think a few words about installing redis might not go amiss.  basically the old bullet points 1 and 2.

Author: I've add some words back in

Note that these dependencies are included if synapse was installed with `[all]`,

> or if using the debian packages from matrix.org.

Reviewer: this probably belongs in the "configuration" section (which you might consider renaming to "Setting up workers" or something) rather than here which feels more like an overview of how it works).

(The older direct TCP connections are now deprecated.) The Redis server
should be installed following the normal procedure for your distribution (e.g.
`apt install redis-server` on Debian). It is safe to use an existing Redis
deployment if you have one.

Once installed, check that Redis is running and accessible from the host running
Synapse, for example by executing `echo PING | nc -q1 localhost 6379` and seeing
a response of `+PONG`.

The appropriate dependencies must also be installed for Synapse. If using a
virtualenv, these can be installed with:

```sh
pip install matrix-synapse[redis]
```

Note that these dependencies are included when synapse is installed with `pip
install matrix-synapse[all]`. They are also included in the debian packages from
`matrix.org` and in the docker images at
https://hub.docker.com/r/matrixdotorg/synapse/.

To make effective use of the workers, you will need to configure an HTTP
reverse-proxy such as nginx or haproxy, which will direct incoming requests to
the correct worker, or to the main synapse instance. See [reverse_proxy.md](reverse_proxy.md)
for information on setting up a reverse proxy.

> To enable workers you should create a configuration file for each worker
> process. Each worker configuration file inherits the configuration of the shared
> homeserver configuration file.  You can then override configuration specific to
> that worker, e.g. the HTTP listener that it provides (if any); logging
> configuration; etc.  You should minimise the number of overrides though to
> maintain a usable config.
> 
> Next you need to add both a HTTP replication listener and redis config to the
> shared Synapse configuration file (`homeserver.yaml`). For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using workers, each worker process has its own configuration file which 
contains settings specific to that worker, such as the HTTP listener that it 
provides (if any), logging configuration, etc.

Normally,  the worker processes are configured to read from a shared
configuration file as well as the worker-specific configuration files. This
makes it easier to keep common configuration settings synchronised across all the 
processes.

The main process is somewhat special in this respect: it does not normally
need its own configuration file and can take all of its configuration from the
shared configuration file.

Normally, only a couple of changes are needed to make an existing configuration
file suitable for use with workers. First, you need to enable an "HTTP replication
listener" for the main process; and secondly, you need to enable redis-based
replication. For example:
```

## Master/worker communication

The processes communicate with each other via a Synapse-specific protocol called
'replication' (analogous to MySQL- or Postgres-style database replication) which
feeds streams of newly written data between processes so they can be kept in
sync with the database state.

Additionally, processes may make HTTP requests to each other. Typically this is
used for operations which need to wait for a reply - such as sending an event.

> As of Synapse v1.13.0, it is possible to configure Synapse to send replication

Reviewer 2: It could be nice to have a snazzy ASCII art diagram here of the processes communicating...

Reviewer: +1

Reviewer: does https://matrix.sw1v.org/_matrix/media/r0/download/sw1v.org/uhqIFIqONRWcRsKgVvbehsqF help? some of the links have been left out for clarity but I think it might help?

Author: Possibly? I'm not really sure who it's aimed at.

Author: Am happy to put it at the end of the doc, to be clear.

Reviewer: > I'm not really sure who it's aimed at.

well, people trying to set up workers. The idea is that a picture helps people get an overview of how it works.

Author: Ok, will add it to the end with a note at the start pointing to it :+1:

via a [Redis pub/sub channel](https://redis.io/topics/pubsub), and is now the
recommended way of configuring replication. This is an alternative to the old
direct TCP connections to the master: rather than all the workers connecting to
the master, all the workers and the master connect to Redis, which relays
replication commands between processes. This can give a significant cpu saving

> on the master and will be a prerequisite for upcoming performance improvements.

Author: Possibly. I think we should but equally I'm tempted to punt that to a separate discussion of if/when/how we deprecate it.

> on the master and will be a prerequisite for upcoming performance improvements.

Reviewer 2: That's fair enough.

requests made to the federation port. See [reverse_proxy.md](reverse_proxy.md)
for information on setting up a reverse proxy.

To enable workers, you need to add both a HTTP replication listener and redis

> config to the main Synapse configuration file (`homeserver.yaml`). For example:

Reviewer: should we describe `homeserver.yaml` as a "shared configuration file" or something?

Author: Good point, now that we're using "main" to mean the main synapse process.

```yaml
listeners:
  # The HTTP replication port
  - port: 9093
    bind_address: '127.0.0.1'
    type: http
    resources:
     - names: [replication]

redis:
    enabled: true
```

See the sample config for the full documentation of each option.

Under **no circumstances** should the replication API listener be exposed to the
public internet; it has no authentication and is unencrypted.

> You should then create a set of configs for the various worker processes.  Each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should then create a configuration file for each worker process.  Each
```

maintain a usable config.

In the config file for each worker, you must specify the type of worker
application (`worker_app`), and you should specify a unqiue name for the worker
(`worker_name`). The currently available worker applications are listed below.
You must also specify the HTTP replication endpoint that it should talk to on
the main synapse process.  `worker_replication_host` should specify the host of
the main synapse and `worker_replication_http_port` should point to the HTTP
replication port.

For example:

```yaml
worker_app: synapse.app.generic_worker
worker_name: worker1

> # The replication listener on the synapse to talk to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# The replication listener on the master synapse process.
```

workers connecting to the master, all the workers and the master connect to
Redis, which relays replication commands between processes. This can give a
significant cpu saving on the master and will be a prerequisite for upcoming
performance improvements.

Note that this support is currently experimental; you may experience lost
messages and similar problems! It is strongly recommended that admins setting
up workers for the first time use direct TCP replication as above.

To configure Synapse to use Redis:

1. Install Redis following the normal procedure for your distribution - for
   example, on Debian, `apt install redis-server`. (It is safe to use an
   existing Redis deployment if you have one: we use a pub/sub stream named
   according to the `server_name` of your synapse server.)
2. Check Redis is running and accessible: you should be able to `echo PING | nc -q1
   localhost 6379` and get a response of `+PONG`.
3. Install the python prerequisites. If you installed synapse into a
   virtualenv, this can be done with:
   ```sh
   pip install matrix-synapse[redis]
   ```
   The debian packages from matrix.org already include the required

>    dependencies.

Reviewer 2: I suspect that some of this is still useful (e.g. `pip install matrix-synapse[redis]` at least)!

Author: Added back in the section talking about the python dependencies.

`systemd` to start synapse workers, see
[systemd-with-workers](systemd-with-workers). To use `synctl`, see below.

> ### Using synctl

Author: I've moved this to a separate doc.

room must be routed to the same instance. Additionally, care must be taken to
ensure that the purge history admin API is not used while pagination requests
for the room are in flight:

    ^/_matrix/client/(api/v1|r0|unstable)/rooms/.*/messages$

Note that the `client` and `federation` must be added to the listener resources
in the worker config.

#### Load balancing

Multiple instances of this app can be run and requests load balanced between
them. However, different endpoints have different characteristics and so admins
may wish to run multiple groups of workers handling different endpoints so that
load balancing can be done in different ways.

For `/sync` and `/initialSync` requests it will be more efficient if all
requests from a particular user are routed to a single instance. Extracting a
user ID from the access token or `Authorization` header is currently left as an
exercise for the reader. Admins may additionally wish to separate out `/sync`
requests that have a `since` query parameter from those that don't (and
`/initialSync`), as requests that don't are known as "initial sync" that happens
when a user logs in on a new device and can be *very* resource intensive, so

> isolating these requests will stop them from intefering with other users ongoing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
isolating these requests will stop them from interfering with other users ongoing
```

> isolating these requests will stop them from intefering with other users ongoing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
exercise for the reader.

Admins may additionally wish to separate out `/sync` requests without a `since`
query parameter (and `/initialSync`) -- these requests are the "initial sync" that
happens when a user logs in on a new device and can be *very* resource intensive.
Isolating these requests will stop them from interfering with other users' incremental
```

syncs.

Federation and client requests can be balanced via simple round robin.

The inbound federation transaction request `^/_matrix/federation/v1/send/`
should be balanced by source IP so that transactions from the same remote server
go to the same process.

Registration/login requests can be handled separately purely to help ensure that
unexpected load doesn't effect new logins and sign ups.

> Finally, event sending requests can be  balanced by the embedded room ID (or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, event sending requests can be balanced by the embedded room ID (or
```

URI, or even just round robin). If there is a large bridge connected that is
sending or may send lots of events, then a dedicated set of workers can be
provisioned to ensure that bursts or increases of event sending is isolated from
effecting events sent by real users.

#### Stream writers

Additionally, there is *experimental* support for moving writing of specific
streams (such as events and typing) off of master to a particular worker. This
requires use of Redis.

To enable this then the worker must have a HTTP replication listener configured,
have a `worker_name` and be listed in the `instance_map` config. For example to
move event persistence off to a dedicated worker, the main shared config would
include:

```yaml
instance_map:
    event_persister1:
        host: localhost
        port: 8034

streams_writers:
    events: event_persister1
```

### `synapse.app.pusher`

Handles sending push notifications to sygnal and email. Doesn't handle any
REST endpoints itself, but you should set `start_pushers: False` in the

> shared configuration file to stop the main synapse sending these notifications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
shared configuration file to stop the main synapse sending push notifications.
```

Note this worker cannot be load-balanced: only one instance should be active.

### `synapse.app.appservice`

Handles sending output traffic to Application Services. Doesn't handle any
REST endpoints itself, but you should set `notify_appservices: False` in the

> shared configuration file to stop the main synapse sending these notifications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
shared configuration file to stop the main synapse sending appservice notifications.
```

Note this worker cannot be load-balanced: only one instance should be active.

### `synapse.app.federation_sender`

Handles sending federation traffic to other servers. Doesn't handle any
REST endpoints itself, but you should set `send_federation: False` in the
shared configuration file to stop the main synapse sending this traffic.

> Note that if running multiple federation senders then you must list each
> instance in the `federation_sender_instances` option by their `worker_name`. If
> you add or remove instances they must all be stopped and started together. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If running multiple federation senders then you must list each
instance in the `federation_sender_instances` option by their `worker_name`.
All instances must be stopped and started when adding or removing instances.
For example:
```

them. However, different endpoints have different characteristics and so admins
may wish to run multiple groups of workers handling different endpoints so that
load balancing can be done in different ways.

For `/sync` and `/initialSync` requests it will be more efficient if all
requests from a particular user are routed to a single instance. Extracting a
user ID from the access token or `Authorization` header is currently left as an
exercise for the reader. Admins may additionally wish to separate out `/sync`
requests that have a `since` query parameter from those that don't (and
`/initialSync`), as requests that don't are known as "initial sync" that happens
when a user logs in on a new device and can be *very* resource intensive, so
isolating these requests will stop them from interfering with other users ongoing
syncs.

Federation and client requests can be balanced via simple round robin.

The inbound federation transaction request `^/_matrix/federation/v1/send/`
should be balanced by source IP so that transactions from the same remote server
go to the same process.

Registration/login requests can be handled separately purely to help ensure that

> unexpected load doesn't effect new logins and sign ups.

Reviewer: I feel I might have mentioned this one in the past.

```suggestion
unexpected load doesn't affect new logins and sign ups.
```

Reviewer: do we actually do this on m.org? I thought they just went to the client reader pool?

Finally, event sending requests can be balanced by the embedded room ID (or

> URI, or even just round robin). If there is a large bridge connected that is

Reviewer: what do you mean by "embedded room ID"?

sending or may send lots of events, then a dedicated set of workers can be

> provisioned to ensure that bursts or increases of event sending is isolated from
> effecting events sent by real users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provisioned to limit the effects of bursts of events from that bridge on events sent by 
normal users.
```

#### Stream writers

Additionally, there is *experimental* support for moving writing of specific
streams (such as events and typing) off of the main process to a particular

> worker. This requires use of Redis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
worker. (This is only supported with Redis-based replication.)
```

> To enable this then the worker must have a HTTP replication listener configured,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable this, the worker must have a HTTP replication listener configured,
```

have a `worker_name` and be listed in the `instance_map` config. For example to
move event persistence off to a dedicated worker, the shared configuration would
include:

```yaml
instance_map:
    event_persister1:
        host: localhost
        port: 8034

streams_writers:

>     events: event_persister1

Reviewer: which streams can be moved in this way? it says "such as events and typing" above but I'm not sure if that is complete?

go to the same process.

Registration/login requests can be handled separately purely to help ensure that
unexpected load doesn't affect new logins and sign ups.

Finally, event sending requests can be balanced by the room ID in the URI (or
the full URI, or even just round robin), the room ID is the path component after
`/rooms/`. If there is a large bridge connected that is sending or may send lots
of events, then a dedicated set of workers can be provisioned to limit the
effects of bursts of events from that bridge on events sent by normal users.

#### Stream writers

Additionally, there is *experimental* support for moving writing of specific
streams (such as events) off of the main process to a particular worker. (This
is only supported with Redis-based replication.)

> Currently support streams are `events` and `typing`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently supported streams are `events` and `typing`.
```
